.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii man.1
.\"
.TH CYG\-APT 1 "2014-08-31"
.SH NAME
cyg\-apt \- a Cygwin package manager utility \-\- command-line interface
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt setup    " [ \-fXq ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ]
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt update   " [ \-Xq ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ]
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt upgrade  " [ \-dxfyzq ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )]
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt install  " [ \-dxfyq ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE...
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt remove   " [ \-fz ] " " \fIPACKAGE...
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt purge    " [ \-fz ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE...
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt source   " [ \-q ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt show     " [ \-q ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt search   " [ \-sq ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " \fISTRING
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt requires " [ \-xq ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt list     " [ \-q ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )]
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt version  " [ \fIPACKAGE ]
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt find     " \fIFILE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt ball     " [ \-mq " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt download " [ \-q ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt filelist " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt md5      " [ \-q ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " "  [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt missing  " [ \-xq ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt new      " [ \-q ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )]
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt url      " [ \-q ] " " [ \-m " " \fIMIRROR_URL ] " " [ \-t " (" prev | curr | test )] " " \fIPACKAGE
.PP
.BR "cyg\-apt " [ help ] " " [ \-h ]
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBcyg\-apt\fR is a command\-line tool for handling packages.
Like \fBapt\-get\fR, \fBcyg\-apt\fR allows you to install and remove packages
on the Cygwin command line, and provides other package management operations.
.PP
Unless the \fB\-h\fR, or \fB\-\-help\fR option is given, one of the commands
below must be present.
.SS Commands
.TP
.B setup
setup is run automatically when \fBcyg\-apt\fR is installed.
If for any reason you wish to reset your configuration file \fI~/.cyg\-apt\fR,
you can add the \fB\-f\fR option.
The configuration information therein is taken from your last Cygwin setup.exe run.
.TP
.B update
update is used to resynchronize the package index files from their sources.
The indexes of available packages are fetched from the location specified by
the \fImirror\fR configuration.
For example, this command retrieves setup.ini file, so that information about
new and updated packages is available.
An update should always be performed before an upgrade.
.TP
.B upgrade
upgrade is used to install the newest versions of all packages currently
installed on the system from the mirror specified by the configuration.
Packages currently installed with new versions available are retrieved and
upgraded.
An update must be performed first so that \fBcyg\-apt\fR knows that new versions
of packages are available.
Use with caution, there are small number of packages \fBcyg\-apt\fR will not
upgrade, see \fBLIMITATIONS\fR.
.TP
.B install
install is followed by one or more packages desired for installation or upgrading.
All packages required by the package(s) specified for installation will also
be retrieved and installed.
The \fImirror\fR configuration is used to locate the desired packages.
A specific distribution can be selected with the \fB\-t\fR option or the \fIdistname\fR configuration.
.TP
.B remove
remove is identical to install except that packages are removed instead of
installed (any configuration files are deleted too).
It remove all files that are listed into the \fI/etc/setup/<PACKAGE>.lst.gz\fR
file.
Packages that the given \fIPACKAGE\fR depend on are not removed.
Use with caution, there are small number of packages \fBcyg\-apt\fR will not
remove, see \fBLIMITATIONS\fR.
.TP
.B purge
purge is identical to remove except that packages are uninstalled and removed
from the package cache.
.TP
.B source
source causes \fBcyg\-apt\fR to fetch source packages.
It will then find and download into the current directory the newest available
version of that source package.
While respect the distribution, set with the \fB\-t\fR option or the \fIdistname\fR configuration, if possible.
.TP
.B show
show the \fIPACKAGE\fR description, as found in the setup.ini database.
.TP
.B search
search performs a full text search on all available package lists for the
\fISTRING\fR given.
It searches the package names and the descriptions for an occurrence of the
\fISTRING\fR and prints out the package name and the short description.
Use the \fB\-s\fR option to treat \fISTRING\fR such as an POSIX regex pattern.
.TP
.B requires
requires shows a listing of each dependency a \fIPACKAGE\fR has.
.TP
.B list
list the installed packages, their versions and newer versions if available.
.TP
.B version
version shows the installed version of a given package. If no packages is given,
the versions of all packages are displayed.
.TP
.B new
Show upgraded packages; print out a list of all packages that are to be upgraded.
.TP
.B filelist
filelist is followed by a package to investigate: the files the package installs
are listed.
.TP
.B find
find is followed by a file to locate the package for: the package the file
belongs to will be printed, if it can be found.
This works for files installed directly from a tarball, but not for files created
after the package is installed or by a postinstall script.
.TP
.B download
download a given package to the package cache but do not install it.
.TP
.B ball
ball shows the path to the tarball for the given package.
.TP
.B url
url shows the URL for a given package's tarball.
.TP
.B md5
md5 checks the md5 checksum of a package in the cache against the expected md5
given in the setup.ini database.
.TP
.B postinstall
Executes all undone postinstall scripts.
.TP
.B postremove
Executes all undone preremove and postremove scripts.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
These options may be given on the command line. Most options are command specific.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-download\-only
Download only; package files are only retrieved, not unpacked or installed.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show a short usage summary.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-mirror = \fIURL
Use the given download mirror.
Be sure to give the complete URL.
The correct \fIURL\fR will be a directory containing the server's \fIsetup.ini\fR.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-dist "=(" curr | test | prev )
Sets the distribution name and overwrite the \fIdistname\fR configuration.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-no\-deps
ignore dependencies.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-regexp
It treats the \fISTRING\fR operand such as a POSIX regex pattern.
.RS
.PP
Example:
.RS
.PP
.nf
$ cyg\-apt \-\-regexp search "p.thon"
.fi
.RE
.RE
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force ", " \-\-nobarred
add/remove packages cyg\-apt itself depends on.
.IP
\fBsetup\fR; overwriting ~/.cyg\-apt configuration file.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-nopostinstall
do not run postinstall scripts when installing.
.IP
Deprecated since version 1.1 and will be removed in 2.0.
.TP
.BR \-y ", "\-\-nopostremove
do not run preremove or postremove scripts when removing.
.IP
Deprecated since version 1.1 and will be removed in 2.0.
.TP
.BR \-q ", "\-\-quiet
Quiet; Produces output suitable for logging, omitting progress indicators.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.PP
The following exit values shall be returned:
.TP
0
All input files were output successfully.
.TP
>0
An error occurred.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.I HOME
This environment variable is used to find the configuration file \fI~/.cyg\-apt\fR.
.TP
.I USERPROFILE
This environment variable is used to find the configuration file \fI~/.cyg\-apt\fR
if \fIHOME\fR does not exists such as on Windows.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cyg\-apt
cyg\-apt is designed to be configured by this file alone.
The syntax of the file is straightforward and there are additional comments to
help you edit the file.
The file lives in your home directory.
For additional configurations, copy the file and place it in the current
directory, then edit it: \fI./.cyg\-apt\fR is used over \fI~/.cyg\-apt\fR.
.IP
The key fields are:
.RS
.RS
.TP
.B ROOT
The root of your Cygwin installation as a windows path ending with a slash.
.TP
.B mirror
The url of your Cygwin mirror.
.TP
.B cache
The path to your package cache.
.TP
.B always_update
Always updates the package index files from the mirror.
cyg\-apt will be faster and use less bandwidth if \fIFalse\fR but you will have
to run the \fBupdate\fR command manually.
.TP
.B distname
The target distribution name takes the following specific values;
.RB ( prev | curr | test ).
Usually you want the \fBcurr\fRent version of a package.
.TP
.B setup_ini
Define the \fIsetup.ini\fR location, standard is
.IR /etc/setup/setup.ini .
.IP
Deprecated since version 1.1 and will be removed in 2.0.
.RE
.RE
.TP
.I /etc/setup/setup.rc
Uses to read from the official Cygwin setup program configuration.
The \fBsetup\fR command use it for fetch the lastest mirror and cache.
.TP
.I /etc/setup/installed.db
Fetch and push from the installed packages database.
.TP
.I /etc/postinstall/
Executes post install scripts
.TP
.I /etc/preremove/
Executes pre remove scripts
.TP
.I /etc/postremove/
Executes post remove scripts
.SH SECURITY
.PP
\fBcyg\-apt\fR follows setup.exe in verifying downloaded setup.ini files using
Cygwin's public key.
This verification is performing using the Cygwin port of gpg package.
This provides some assurance that the mirror is not providing malware versions
of Cygwin packages, since any changes to setup.ini such as changes to package
md5sum values will cause the signature not to match the file.
An attacker able to edit cyg\-apt or replace gpg with their own package can subvert
this protection.
.SH BUGS
.PP
\fBcyg\-apt\fR, running within Cygwin, cannot alter packages it itself depends on.
It is possible to run cyg\-apt in and Windows command shell, but a more convenient
workaround is to use the standard setup.exe installer to update these packages.
.PP
Report bugs to the \fBcyg\-apt issue page\fR[1] where the development and maintenance
is primarily done.
.SH AUTHOR
The original cyg\-apt was written by Jan Nieuwenhuizen.
For a list of all authors, please see the \fBAUTHORS\fR[2] file.
.SH NOTES
.TP
1. cyg\-apt issue page
https://github.com/nylen/cyg\-apt/issues
.TP
2. AUTHORS
/usr/share/doc/cyg\-apt/AUTHORS
